---
layout: post
title: "On the origin of Visual Thinking Design Patterns"
---
**Colin Ware**

I have spent most of a career forming principles for effective data display from what we know about human perception. But improving how data looks, though valuable, is only part of the story;  the big payoff often comes from effective use of interaction.  In 2005, this realization lead me to think about how understanding more cognitive aspects of human perception could help us design better visualizations.  The intellectual products from the use of visualizations are the result of a kind of collaboration between human thinking processes and computer programs, with visualization as a kind of internal interface.  Many useful interactive techniques have been developed over the years, such as brushing and dynamic queries, and these can be transformative, but there is been little principled guidance on when to use particular methods.   Ben Shneiderman provided some help with his famous  mantra “overview first, zoom and filter, details on demand”, but this obviously does not always apply. Many times we start with the details and pull on the strings to get related information. So we need guidelines on when “overview first” this should be our guiding design principle, and when not. 
Also, how can we take advantage of the huge advances that have been made, from decades of research into how people think? There was no easy to use framework for applying knowledge about cognition to interaction design.  Work I did in collaboration with Matthew Plumlee, gave me hope, we showed that quite basic understanding of human cognition, particularly the limits of visual working memory, can provide guidance.  We found that a little bit of theory can go a long way to allowing use to think more generally about the design of interfaces. 
Initially, I began by developing visual thinking algorithms as a way of reasoning about about cognitive systems, and, with a nudge from a DARPA program manager, Rand Waltzman, these became visual thinking design patterns in 2013.  
Many people have helped along the way.  In particular Bill Wright of Oculus, Nick Pioch of Systems Technology Research. Former student Matthew Plumlee, and current student Dan Bolan have and are helping to refine ideas.  Chris White, another DARPA program manager has also been supportive.
Visual thinking design patterns are a work in progress. At the bottom of each design pattern page is a comments section.  If you have ideas about new patterns, of the refinement of existing patterns please contribute.
