---
layout: post
title: "VTDP: Sensemaking"
---


Sensemaking is a term applied to the overall process of analysis only parts of
which typically involve visualization. Sensemaking provides a process framework
in which many of the analytic tasks reside. The process of sensemaking is
characterized by Pirolli and Card [^1] as a set of nested loops as illustrated
below.

![Sensemaking process: Pirolli and Card](/images/pirolli_card.jpg)

The first loop which puts data in a "shoebox" is sometimes called data wrangling
or data munging or data marshaling. (see [VTDP Data Assessment](/data-assessment/)).

This exists in larger scale foraging loop involving processes aimed at seeking
information, searching and filtering it, and reading and extracting information
[^1].

The second big loop is sensemaking itself and this has the goal of developing in
the mind of the analyst a mental model that accounts for the evidence and
applies it to some analytic problem. Most of the VTDPs describe methods that
apply to the second loop. However, the major insights leading to an analytic
breakthrough are as likely to occur when driving to work or even during sleep
(this is not fanciful, many studies show that the brain reorganizes information
during sleep). The VTDPs presented here, for the most part, enable the analyst
to efficiently find out what is important in the data relative to some specific
analytic task, supporting of efficient pattern search, and small scale
hypothesis testing. Rarely is a major insight likely to occur during detailed
analysis, but detailed analysis is usually a prerequisite for major insights to
occur.

The final stage of the process involves presenting the results of analysis to
others. At this stage insights are presented, together with the data patterns
that support the insights. The VTDP Presentation: Linking Images and Words
describes when images and words respectively should be used to make an
effective presentation.

------

###References

[^1]: Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (2005, May). The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task analysis. In Proceedings of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis (Vol. 5).
